Web Kameswari Chebrolu Department of CSE IIT Bombay https://i.imgflip.com/2uj8rv.jpg World Wide Web (WWW) A service provided over Internet, enabling users • to access and interact with a vast array of information and services Origins: 1989 Tim Berners-Lee (CERN) proposed • mechanism to distribute high-energy physics data (reports, photos, blueprints etc) Proposal eventually lead to World Wide Web – (WWW) Terminology Web Server: a software application hosted on a ● machine, that delivers web content/service Browser requests arrive here – Serves static content – Web Client (Browser): Application running on ● user’s device Sends out requests to server, processes received – responses and renders web pages Web Application: a software program or set of ● programs that run on a web server Help dynamically generates content in response to – requests Involve server-side scripting, database interactions, – and complex business logic E.g. Amazon, Facebook, Google docs, BodhiTree etc – WWW Web Server emiT HTTP Request CRUNCH!!
CRUNCH!!
CRUNCH!!
Browser HTTP Response Database Application Server H T T a P n d r e r e q u Business Logic s e p s o t n s s e Client s Web Server Outline What is a web page?
• How does a browser interact with server to • download web pages?
How do servers serve web pages?
• Web Page Website made of Web Pages ● Web pages are written in HyperText Markup ● Language (HTML) Web page consists of base HTML file which includes ● several referenced objects Object can be other HTML files, image files, Java applets, – audio files etc Text/Image that links to another page is called a hyperlink – (often highlighted by some means) Each object is addressable by a URL (Uniform ● Resource Locator) Protocol Host Name Path E.g. http://www.iitb.ac.in/images/header/iitb_logo.gif – Browsers send requests for HTML and referenced ● objects Browsers interpret received responses and ● displays content aesthetically Hyper Text Transfer Protocol (HTTP/HTTPs) The protocol employed by Web application Request • Based on client-server model • Response Client (browser) requests web objects – Request • GET and POST method Response Server responds with status code and requested – object (if present) • 200 OK, 404 not found etc Operates over TCP, server port 80 (http), 443 (https) • Server Internals Servers serve two types of content: Static and ● Dynamic Static ● HTML files, image files, javascript files – Locate the requested file on file system and return – unaltered in HTTP response Server-side Client-side HTTP Request Static:
HTML CSS JS HTTP Response images pdfs Files Web Server Browser etc Client-Side Server-Side Static Resources:
1 CSS JavaScript 7 Images HTTP Request HTTP Response HTML Templates Web Server Files Browser 6 3 Request 5 2 Data 3 HTML Web Application Database 4 Client-side Programming Code that runs in the browser • E.g. Javascript – Note: HTML, CSS are for markup/styling • Primarily concerned with improving the • appearance and behavior of a rendered web page Selecting and styling UI components, creating – layouts, form validation etc Server Side Programming Code that runs in the server • Helps create dynamic pages – E.g. PHP, Python, Ruby, C#, and JavaScript – (NodeJS) Developers typically write their code using web • frameworks (Django/Python, Flask etc) Collections of functions, objects, rules and other – code constructs Helps solve common problems, speed up – development etc Our Focus: Static Pages and Client Side Programming!