LEARNING
Course instructor:
Dr Shweta Chawak
Assistant Professor
Humanities and Social Sciences
IIT Bombay
18/02/2026 HS 110 | Introduction to Psychology 1
Theories of Learning: Operant Conditioning
▪ Classical conditioning - learning of involuntary,
automatic responses
▪ Operant conditioning - organisms learning of
voluntary responses
▪ Edward L. Thorndike and B. F. Skinner
▪ Experiment of the ‘puzzle box’ by Thorndike
• Hungry cat placed in puzzle box – press lever to escape
• Trial and error
▪ Trial-and-error learning
• Cat pushes the lever and opens the door
• Lever (stimulus), pushing the lever (response), consequence-
escaping (good) and food (better)
18/02/2026 HS 110 | Introduction to Psychology 2
@Geert Stienissen
18/02/2026 HS 110 | Introduction to Psychology 3
Theories of Learning: Operant Conditioning (cont’d…)
Law of effect:
▪ If an action is followed by a pleasurable consequence, it will tend to be repeated
▪ If an action is followed by an unpleasant consequence, it will tend not to be repeated
Operant conditioning:
▪ The learning of voluntary behavior through the effects of pleasant and unpleasant
consequences to responses
▪ Operant = any behavior that is voluntary and not elicited by specific stimuli
▪ B. F. Skinner
▪ Effect of consequences on behavior
▪ E.g., “If I do this, what’s in it for me?”
18/02/2026 HS 110 | Introduction to Psychology 4
Theories of Learning: Operant Conditioning (cont’d…)
“What’s in it for me?”
▪ Reinforcement: Any event or stimulus, that when following a
response, increases the probability that the response will occur
again
▪ “To strengthen”
▪ Related to the law of effect
▪ E.g., work and paycheck (pleasant consequence); avoiding doing
chores (unpleasant consequence)
18/02/2026 HS 110 | Introduction to Psychology 5
Theories of Learning: Operant Conditioning (cont’d…)
Types of Reinforcement
Primary reinforcer: Secondary reinforcer:
Any reinforcer that is naturally reinforcing by meeting a Any reinforcer that becomes reinforcing after being paired
basic biological need, such as hunger, thirst, or touch with a primary reinforcer, such as praise, tokens, or gold stars
Positive reinforcement: Negative reinforcement:
The reinforcement of a response by the addition or The reinforcement of a response by the removal, escape from,
experiencing of a pleasurable stimulus or avoidance of an unpleasant stimulus
E.g., getting a shout-out on the university’s social E.g., the professor stops sending reminder emails about missed
media page after volunteering at a campus event assignments once a student begins submitting all work on time
BOTH positive AND negative reinforcement increase the likelihood of the behavior they follow—they both have the effect of strengthening,
or reinforcing, the behavior
18/02/2026 HS 110 | Introduction to Psychology 6
Theories of Learning: Operant Conditioning (cont’d…)
Schedule Type Definition Example
Student receives a reward for every 5
Reinforcement after a set number of
Fixed Ratio questions answered correctly on an
responses
online quiz
Extra credit is given after a random
number of class participation points-
Reinforcement after an unpredictable could be the 2nd, 7th, or 10th time a
Variable Ratio
number of responses student chimes in
Slot machines or games
Weekly review session: Students get
bonus points if they submit weekly
Reinforcement after a fixed amount of
Fixed Interval reflection papers on time
time passes
Salary
Surprise pop quizzes are given;
Reinforcement after a varying, students never know exactly when,
Variable Interval
unpredictable amount of time sometimes after 3 days, sometimes
after 8 days
18/02/2026 HS 110 | Introduction to Psychology 7
Theories of Learning: Operant Conditioning (cont’d…)
When you want to weaken the response
Punishment by Application
Something unpleasant is added to the situation to reduce
Reinforcement Punishment
the response
Positive Reinforcement Punishment by Application
Positive
For example: Scolding, extra homework,
Something valuable or Something unpleasant is
(Adding)
desirable is added added
Negative Negative reinforcement Punishment by removal
Punishment by removal
(Removing/ Something unpleasant is Something desirable is
Behaviour is punished by removal of something
avoiding) removed removed
pleasurable or desired after the behaviour occurs
For example: Removing freedom by grounding, taking
away phone (going out with friends or talking on phone)
18/02/2026 HS 110 | Introduction to Psychology 8
Theories of Learning: Operant Conditioning (cont’d…)
Which of the following examples would be reinforcement or punishmentand which would be negative reinforcement:
1. P’s father nags him to wash his car. P hates being nagged, so he washes the car so his father will stop nagging
2. N learns that talking in a funny voice gets him lots of attention from his classmates, so now he talks that way more often
3. A student keeps talking during lectures. The teacher responds by assigning extra homework each time the student talks. Over time, the student
talks less in class
4. R repeatedly watches television and procrastinating. After several warnings, her mother takes away her television privileges for three days. After
this, R stops procrastinating and is doing her homework
1. Negative reinforcement: P is being negatively reinforced for washing his car because the nagging (unpleasant stimulus) stops when he does so
2. Positive reinforcement: N is getting positive reinforcement in the form of his classmates’ attention
3. Punishment by application: Student is punished by adding extra homework hence, student talks less
4. Punishment by removal: TV privileges were removed leading reducing procrastination
What type of reinforcement or punishment worked best for you when you were in school?
18/02/2026 HS 110 | Introduction to Psychology 9
Theories of Learning: Operant Conditioning (cont’d…)
@TheB18ig/0B2a/2n0g2T6heory HS 110 | Introduction to Psychology 10
Theories of Learning: Observational Learning
Learning new behavior by watching a model perform that behavior
18/02/2026 HS 110 | Introduction to Psychology 11
Theories of Learning: Observational Learning (cont’d…)
Four elements of observational learning:
Attention: To learn anything through observation, the learner must first pay attention to the
model
E.g., watching a senior student answer questions confidently in discussion
Memory: The learner must also be able to retain the memory of what was done
E.g., remembering the key arguments and style used
Imitation: The learner must be capable of reproducing, or imitating, the actions of the
model
E.g., using a similar approach in their own discussion response
Desire: Finally, the learner must have the desire or motivation to perform the action
E.g., driven by wanting peer approval and good participation marks
18/02/2026 HS 110 | Introduction to Psychology 12
Conclusion
• Operant conditioning
• Positive reinforcement
• Negative reinforcement
• Punishment by application
• Punishment by removal
• Observational learning
• Attention
• Memory
• Imitation
• Desire
18/02/2026 HS 110 | Introduction to Psychology 13